Chapters 5 and 6 of the Gospel of Mark.
This is a LibriVox recording. All LibriVox recordings are in the public domain.
For more information or to volunteer, please visit LibriVox.org.
Recording by Simon Wainwright.
The Gospel of Mark. Chapter 5.
And they came over onto the other side of the sea, into the country of the Gadarenes.
And when he was come out of the ship, immediately there met him, out of the tombs,
a man with an unclean spirit, who had his dwelling among the tombs, and no man could bind him.
No, not with chains, because that he had been often bound with fetters and chains,
and the chains had been plucked asunder by him, and the fetters broken into pieces,
neither could any man tame him.
And always, night and day, he was in the mountains and in the tombs, crying and cutting himself with stones.
But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and worshipped him, and cried with a loud voice,
and said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou son of the Most High God?
I adjure thee, by God, that thou torment me not.
For he said unto him, Come out of the man, thou unclean spirit.
And he asked him, What is thy name?
And he answered, saying, My name is Legion, for we are many.
And he besought him much, that he would not send him away out of the country.
Now there was there, nigh unto the mountains, a great herd of swine feeding.
And all the devils besought him, saying, Send us into the swine, that we may enter into them.
And forthwith Jesus gave them leave.
And the unclean spirits went out and entered into the swine,
and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the sea.
They were about two thousand, and were choked in the sea.
And they that fed the swine fled, and told it in the city and in the country.
And they went out to see what it was that was done.
And they came to Jesus to see him that was possessed with the devil and the legion,
sitting and clothed in his right mind.
And they were afraid.
And they that saw it told them how it befell to him that was possessed with the devil and also concerning the swine.
And they began to pray him to depart out of their coast.
And when he was come into the ship, he that had been possessed with the devil prayed him that he might be with him.
Howbeit Jesus suffered him not, but saith unto him,
Go home to thy friends, and tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee.
And he departed and began to publish in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for him.
And all men did marvel.
And when Jesus was passed over again by ship unto the other side,
much people gathered unto him, and he was nigh unto the sea.
And, behold, there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jarius by name.
And when he saw him, he fell at his feet.
And he besought him greatly, saying, My little daughter lieth at the point of death.
I pray thee, come and lay thy hands on her, that she may be healed and she may live.
And Jesus went with him, and much people followed him and thronged him.
And a certain woman, which had an issue of blood twelve years,
and had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had,
and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse.
When she had heard of Jesus, came in the press behind, and touched his garment.
For she said, If I may touch but his clothes, I shall be whole.
And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up,
and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague.
And Jesus, immediately knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him,
turned him about in the press, and said, Who touched my clothes?
And his disciples said unto him, Thou seest the multitude thronging thee,
and sayest thou who touched me?
And he looked round about to see her that had done this thing.
But the woman, fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in her,
came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.
And he said unto her, Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole.
Go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.
While he yet spake, there came, from the ruler of the synagogue's house,
certain which said, Thy daughter is dead. Why troublest thou the master any further?
As soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken,
he saith unto the ruler of the synagogue, Be not afraid, only believe.
And he suffered no man to follow him save Peter and James and John the brother of James.
And he cometh to the house of the ruler of the synagogue,
and seeth the tumult and them that wept and wailed greatly.
And when he was come in, he saith unto them, Why make ye this ado and weep?
The damsel is not dead, but sleepeth.
And they laughed him to scorn, but when he had put them all out,
he taketh the father and the mother of the damsel and them that were with him,
and entereth in where the damsel was lying.
And he took the damsel by the hand and said unto her,
Talitha cum I, which is being interpreted, Damsel, I say unto thee arise.
And straightway the damsel arose and walked, for she was of the age of twelve years,
and they were astonished with a great astonishment.
And he charged them straightly that no man should know it,
and commanded that something should be given her to eat.
CHAPTER VI.
And he went out from thence, and came into his own country, and his disciples follow him.
And when the Sabbath day was come, he began to teach in the synagogue.
And many hearing him were astonished, saying,
From whence hath this man these things, and what wisdom is this which is given unto him,
that even such mighty works are wrought by his hands?
Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James, and Osais, and Judah, and Simon,
and are not his sisters here with us? And they were offended at him.
But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not without honor, but in his own country,
and among his own kin, and in his own house.
And he could there do no mighty work, save that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk and healed them.
And he marveled because of their unbelief, and he went round about the village's teaching.
And he called unto him the Twelve, and began to send them forth by two and two,
and gave them power over unclean spirits, and commanded them that they should take nothing for their journey,
save a staff only, no script, no bread, no money in their purse, but be shod with sandals, and not put on two coats.
And he said unto them, In what place soever ye enter into, in house, there abide till ye depart from that place.
And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart thence, shake off the dust under your feet,
for a testimony against them, verily I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city.
And they went out and preached that men should repent, and they cast out many devils, and anointed with oil many that were sick and healed them.
And King Herod heard of him, for his name was spread abroad, and he said that John the Baptist was risen from the dead,
and therefore mighty works do show forth themselves in him.
Others said that it is Elias, and others said that it is a prophet, or as one of the prophets.
But when Herod heard thereof, he said, It is John whom I beheaded, he is risen from the dead.
For Herod himself had sent forth, and laid hold upon John, and bound him in prison for Herodias' sake, his brother Phillips' wife.
For he had married her. For John had said unto Herod, It is not lawful for thee to have thy brother's wife.
Therefore Herodias had a quarrel against him, and would have him killed, but she could not.
For Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man, and unholy, and observed him.
And when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly.
And when a convenient day was come, that Herod, on his birthday, made a supper to his lords, high captains, and chief estates of Galilee.
And when the daughter of the said Herodias came in, and danced, and pleased Herod, and them that sat with him, the king said unto the damsel,
Ask of me whatsoever thou wilt, and I will give it thee. And he sware unto her, Whatsoever thou shall ask of me, I will give it thee unto the half of my kingdom.
And she went forth, and said unto her mother, What shall I ask? And she said, The head of John the Baptist.
And she came in straightway with haste unto the king, and asked, saying, I will that thou give me, by and by, in a charger, the head of John the Baptist.
And the king was exceeding sorry, yet for his oaths sake, and for their sakes which set with him, he would not reject her.
And immediately the king sent an executioner, and commanded his head to be brought.
And he went and beheaded him in the prison, and brought his head in a charger, and gave it to the damsel, and the damsel gave it to her mother.
And when his disciples heard of it, they came and took up his corpse, and laid it in a tomb.
And the apostles gathered themselves together unto Jesus, and told him all things, both what they had done, and what they had taught.
And he said unto them, Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest awhile, for there are many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat.
And they departed into a desert place by ship, privately. And the people saw them departing, and many knew him, and ran afoot thither out of all cities, and out went them, and came together unto him.
And Jesus, when he came out, saw much people, and was moved with compassion toward them, because they were as sheep, not having a shepherd.
And he began to teach them many things. And when the day was now far spent, his disciples came unto him, and said, This is a desert place, and now the time is far past.
Send them away, that they may go into the country round about, and into the villages, and buy themselves bread, for they have nothing to eat.
He answered and said unto them, Give ye them to eat. And they say unto him, Shall we go and buy two hundred penny worth of food, and give them to eat?
And he sayeth unto them, How many loaves have ye? Go and see. And when they knew, they say, Five and two fishes. And he commanded them to make all sit down by companies upon the green grass.
And they sat down in ranks by hundreds and by fifties. And when he had taken the five loaves and the two fish, he looked up to heaven and blessed, and break the loaves, and gave them to his disciples to set before them.
And the two fishes divided he among them all. And they did all eat and were filled. And they took up twelve baskets full of the fragments and of the fish.
And they that did eat of the loaves were about five thousand men. And straightway he constrained his disciples to get into the ship and to go to the other side before unto Bethesda, while he sent away the people.
And when he had sent them away, he departed into a mountain to pray. And when even was come, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and he alone on the land.
And he saw them toiling and rowing, for the wind was contrary unto them. And about the fourth watch of the night he cometh unto them, walking upon the sea, and would have passed by them.
But when they saw him walking upon the sea, they supposed it had been a spirit, and cried out. For they all saw him, and were troubled. And immediately he talked with them, and sayeth unto them, Be of good cheer, it is I, be not afraid.
And when he went up unto them into the ship, and the wind ceased, they were sore amazed in themselves, beyond measure, and wondered.
For they considered not the miracle of the loaves, for their heart was hardened. And when they had passed over, they came into the land of Geneseret, and drew to the shore.
And when they were come out of the ship straightway, they knew him, and ran through that whole region round about, and began to carry about in bids those that were sick, where they heard he was.
And whither soe'er he entered into villages, or cities, or country, they laid the sick in the streets, and besought him, that they might touch, if it were. But the border of his garment, and as many as touched him, were made whole.
Thank you.